(From the manual page "wndb" distributed with the UNIX version of WordNet)

WNDB(5)               WordNet File Formats                WNDB(5)
WordNet             Last change: 3 March 1995


NAME
     index.noun,  data.noun,  index.verb,  data.verb,  index.adj,
     data.adj,  index.adv,  data.adv,  verb.Framestext  - WordNet
     database files (default file names)

     noun.idx, noun.dat, verb.idx,  verb.dat,  adj.idx,  adj.dat,
     adv.idx, adv.dat, vframes.txt - WordNet database files (PC)

     cousin.tops, cousin.exc - files used by search code to group
     similar senses

     cousin.tps, cousin.exc - files used by search code to  group
     similar senses (PC)

     noun.exc, verb.exc. adj.exc adv.exc -  morphology  exception
     lists

     cntlist - file used to calculate sense numbers based on fre-
     quency of use in semantically tagged corpora

     (The remainder of this manual page refers to database  files
     by their default file names.)

DESCRIPTION
     For  each  syntactic  category,  two  files  are  needed  to
     represent  the  WordNet  database  - index.pos and data.pos,
     where pos is noun, verb, adj and adv.

     Each index file is an alphabetized list  of  all  the  words
     found  in  WordNet  in the corresponding part of speech.  On
     each line, following the word, is a list of byte offsets  in
     the  corresponding data file, one for each synset containing
     the word.  Words in the index file are in lower  case  only,
     regardless  of  how  they  were entered in the lexicographer
     files.  This folds various orthographic  representations  of
     the word into one line enabling database searches to be case
     insensitive.

     A data file contains information corresponding to  the  syn-
     sets  that  were  specified in the lexicographer files, with
     relational pointers resolved to  byte  offsets  in  data.pos
     files.   Pointers  are  traced  by moving from one synset to
     another via their byte offsets.   Information  in  the  data
     files represents all of the word senses in the WordNet data-
     base.  The word, id, and lex_file_num fields from  a  synset
     together uniquely identify each word sense in WordNet.

     The exception list files, pos.exc, are used to help the mor-
     phological  processor find base forms from irregular inflec-
     tions.

     The  files  cousin.tops  and  cousin.exc  are  used  by  the
     searching  software  to  display  similar  senses  of a word
     together.

     The text of the verb frames and  their  corresponding  frame
     numbers  is provided in a machine readable file, however the
     file is not used by any software in the WordNet system.

     The various database files are in formats  that  are  easily
     human  and  machine  readable.   The WordNet system provides
     command line and window-based interfaces  to  the  database.
     All of the interfaces to WordNet utilize a common library of
     search and morphology code.  The database files and  library
     functions  are  accessible  to those who wish to write their
     own applications.  See wnintro(3WN) for an overview  of  the
     WordNet library.

     See wngloss(7WN) for a glossary of WordNet terminology and a
     discussion  of  the database's content and logical organiza-
     tion.

  Index File Format
     Each index file begins with several lines containing a copy-
     right  notice,  version  number and license agreement. These
     lines all begin with two spaces and the line number so  they
     do  not  interfere  with the binary search algorithm that is
     used to look up entries in the index files.  Items  enclosed
     in square brackets may not be present.  Fields are separated
     by one space.

          word  pos  poly_cnt  p_cnt  [ptr_types]  sns_cnt  synset_offset  [synset_offset...]

     word           ASCII text of word (lower case only).

     pos            Part of speech: n for noun files, v for  verb
                    files,  a  for  adjective files, r for adverb
                    files.

     poly_cnt       Decimal number of different senses (polysemy)
                    word  has  in  a machine-readable dictionary.
                    Note that this is NOT  the  number  of  sense
                    that word has in WordNet.

     p_cnt          Decimal number of different types of pointers
                    word has in all synsets containing word.

     ptr_types      A space separated  list  of  p_cnt  different
                    types  of  pointers that word has in all syn-
                    sets containing word. See wninput(5WN) for  a
                    list  of  pointer  symbols.  If a word has no
                    pointers, this field is omitted and p_cnt  is
                    0.

     sns_cnt        Decimal number  of  synsets  that  this  word
                    appears  in.  This is the number of senses of
                    the word in WordNet.

     synset_offset  A list  of  one  or  more  indices  into  the
                    corresponding  data.pos  file,  one  for each
                    occurrence   of    word    in    a    synset.
                    synset_offset is an 8 digit, right justified,
                    zero-filled decimal  integer  indicating  the
                    byte  offset of the synset in the correspond-
                    ing data.pos  file,  and  can  be  used  with
                    fseek(3) to read a synset from the data file.

  Data File Format
     Each data file begins with several lines containing a  copy-
     right  notice,  version number and license agreement.  These
     lines all begin with two spaces and the line  number.   This
     information  is followed by a list (one per line) of all the
     input files that were included when grind(1WN) was  used  to
     build the database.

     Each data line of a data file contains the following fields.
     Items enclosed in square brackets may not be present. Fields
     are separated by one space.  All integer fields are of fixed
     length and are right justified and zero-filled.

     synset_offset  lex_file_num  pos  w_cnt  word  id  [word  id...]  p_cnt  [ptr...]  [f_cnt]  [frame...]  [gloss]


     synset_offset  Current   byte   offset    in    the    file.
                    synset_offset  is an 8 digit decimal integer.
                    It can also be used  as  a  key  to  uniquely
                    identify a synset in an application such as a
                    relational database or Prolog.

     lex_file_num   Two digit decimal  integer  corresponding  to
                    the  lexicographer  file  name containing the
                    synset.  See lexnames(5WN) for  the  list  of
                    filenames and their corresponding numbers.

     pos            n for noun synsets, v for verb synset, a  for
                    adjective  cluster head synsets, s for adjec-
                    tive satellite synsets, r for adverb synsets.

     w_cnt          Two digit hexadecimal integer indicating  the
                    number of words in the synset.

     word           ASCII form of a word as entered in the synset
                    by  the  lexicographer.  The text of the word
                    is case sensitive, in contrast with its  form
                    in  the  corresponding  index.pos file, which
                    contains only lower-case forms.  In data.adj,
                    a word is immediately followed by a syntactic
                    marker if one was specified in the lexicogra-
                    pher  file.   A syntactic marker is appended,
                    in parentheses, onto word without any  inter-
                    vening  spaces.   See wninput(5WN) for a list
                    of syntactic markers for adjectives.

     id             One  digit  hexadecimal  integer  that,  when
                    appended  onto  word, uniquely identifies the
                    sense within a lexicographer file.   Non-zero
                    values  are  inserted by the lexicographer as
                    additional senses of the word  are  added  to
                    the  same  file.  If no id is assigned by the
                    lexicographer 0 is used.

     p_cnt          Three digit decimal  integer  indicating  the
                    number of pointers from the synset.

     ptr            A list of pointers from the synset.  ptr is a
                    pointer  symbol  followed  by  a  space,  the
                    synset_offset of the target synset,  followed
                    by a space, a part-of-speech character (n, v,
                    a,  r)   indicating   which   data.pos   file
                    synset_offset  indexes  into,  followed  by a
                    space and a four digit source/target field.

                    The  first  two  hexadecimal  digits  of  the
                    source/target  field  indicate  which word in
                    the synset the pointer is from.  If the value
                    is  00,  the pointer is from all of the words
                    in the source synset.  The second two hexade-
                    cimal  digits indicate which word in the tar-
                    get synset the pointer is to.  If  the  value
                    is  00, the pointer is to all of the words in
                    the  target  synset.    Words   numbers   are
                    assigned  by numbering the word fields in the
                    synset, from left to right, beginning with 1.
                    Non-zero  values  indicate  lexical  pointers
                    between specific  words  in  synsets,  rather
                    than semantic pointers for which the relation
                    holds between entire synsets.

                    See wninput(5WN) for a lists of pointer  sym-
                    bols,  and semantic and lexical pointer clas-
                    sifications.

     f_cnt          Two  digit  decimal  integer  indicating  the
                    number  of  verb  frames in the synset.  This
                    field is present only in verb files.

     frame          In the verb file only, a list of  verb  frame
                    numbers  for  the  words in the synset.  Each
                    verb frame is represented by a +, followed by
                    a  space,  followed  by  a  two digit decimal
                    integer indicating  the  verb  frame  number.
                    This  is  followed by a space and a two digit
                    hexadecimal integer indicating  the  word  in
                    the  synset  the  verb  frame applies to.  As
                    with pointers, if  this  number  is  00,  the
                    frame number applies to all words in the syn-
                    set.  If non-zero, word numbers are  assigned
                    as  above.   See wninput(5WN) for the text of
                    the verb frames.

     gloss          Each synset may  optionally  have  a  textual
                    gloss.   A gloss is a vertical pipe (|), fol-
                    lowed by a text string.  The gloss  continues
                    until  the  line  termination is indicated by
                    two spaces and an end of line.  The gloss may
                    contain a definition, an example sentence, or
                    both.

  Sense Numbers
     Senses are generally ordered from most to  least  frequently
     used,  with  the  most common sense numbered 1.  Senses that
     have occurred in corpora that have been semantically  tagged
     determine the frequency of the senses.  Senses that have not
     occurred are presented in haphazard order.  At this time, no
     indication  is  given  in  the  database  as  to which sense
     numbers are based on semantic tag frequency counts and which
     are haphazard.

     The result of the sense ordering is  determined  by  reading
     the  synset_offset  fields  of  a line in an index file from
     left to right, and assigning sense numbers  to  the  offsets
     beginning  with 1.  When a synset is read from a correspond-
     ing data file,  the  sense  of  the  word  is  assigned  the
     synset_offset sense number from the index file.

     The cntlist file provided with  the  database  contains  one
     line for each sense that has been tagged in the corpora.  If
     it is necessary to determine whether a sense number is based
     on  frequency  counts or not, a check can be made in cntlist
     for the sense.  If the sense is present, the sense number is
     based  on  frequency data.  See cntlist(5WN) for information
     on the format of the cntlist file.

  Format of Sense Grouping Files
     The default display for WordNet searches is to  show  senses
     in  order  of  frequency  of  use  in corpora that have been
     semantically tagged.  The grouped  search  displays  similar
     senses of a word together.

     Two files are used by the grouping algorithm of the  WordNet
     search  code.   cousin.tops  is  a  list  of  pairs  of byte
     offsets, each pair representing a set of top nodes  for  the
     cousin  grouping  relation.   Each  line  contains a pair of
     space separated synset_offsets.

     Each candidate for grouping has been  checked  by  hand  and
     exceptions  are listed in cousin.exc.  Each line contains at
     least two space separated synset_offsets, with  the  one  of
     lower  numerical  value coming first.  If additional offsets
     are present, they are all of greater  numerical  value  than
     the  first  field.   Offsets  occurring  on  the  same  line
     represent synsets containing different senses of a word that
     should  not  be grouped together.  Note that although excep-
     tions can exists for all three grouping relations, the  file
     is named cousin.exc.

     See groups(7WN) for more information on grouping senses.

  Exception List File Format
     Exception lists are alphabetized lists of inflected and base
     forms  of  words.   The  first  field  of  each  line  is an
     inflected form, followed by a space separated list of one or
     more  base  forms  of the word.  There is one exception list
     for each syntactic category.

     Note that the exception  lists  (except  for  adj.exc)  were
     culled  from a machine-readable dictionary, and contain many
     words that are not  in  WordNet.   Also,  for  many  of  the
     inflected  forms,  base  forms could be easily derived using
     the standard rules of  detachment  programmed  into  Morphy.
     These  anomalies are allowed to remain in the exception list
     files, as they do no harm.

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
     WNSEARCHDIR         Directory in which the WordNet  database
                         has  been  installed.   Unix  default is
                         /usr/local/wordnet/dict, PC  default  is
                         c:\wordnet\dict,  Macintosh  default  is
                         :Database.

FILES
     $WNSEARCHDIR/index.*               database   index    files
                                        (Unix and Macintosh)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/*.idx                 database index files (PC)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/data.*                database data files (Unix
                                        and Macintosh)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/*.dat                 database data files (PC)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/cousin.*              files   used   to   group
                                        similar senses

     $WNSEARCHDIR/verb.Framestext       text of verb frames (Unix
                                        and Macintosh)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/vframes.txt           text of verb frames (PC)

     $WNSEARCHDIR/*.exc                 morphology      exception
                                        lists

     $WNSEARCHDIR/cntlist               number  of   times   each
                                        sense is tagged

SEE ALSO
     wn(1WN),     grind(1WN),     wnintro(3WN),     cntlist(5WN),
     lexnames(5WN), wninput(5WN), groups(7WN), wngloss(7WN).







































WordNet             Last change: 3 March 1995                   7



